Windows PowerShell.
The historical perspective for PowerShell comes from the scripting
that's been part of operating systems for many years.
For instance, Bash is the command-line environment in UNIX.
That's a super old operating system.
I'm 47 years old and I think UNIX is older than I am.
Linux is a more recent variant of UNIX,
it's intended to be a free and open source product,
but both of them use this command shell called Bash
and it's imminently scriptable.
Now what is a script?
The idea is if there is a task,
any kind of routine or mundane task may be a non-trivial task
that you have to do over and over again,
that's a good candidate for automation.
And by creating a script file and then perhaps
running the script file on a schedule,
you can dramatically improve your efficiency.
So Bash shell scripting in UNIX, Linux is still a really big deal.
In the Windows world, it's been a slower uptake.
We've had the what's called the Windows shell scripting environment,
Win batches it's sometimes called,
not anywhere near as powerful as what you can do with Bash shell scripting.
So it really wasn't until Jeffrey Snover,
if you've ever heard that name, a Microsoft distinguished engineer,
the inventor of PowerShell,
came along with a lot of experience in UNIX himself thinking why
don't we apply some of the best parts of different shell scripting
and programmatic scripting environments,
why don't we bring all of that to Windows and allow you to do that kind
of automation and that's what Windows PowerShell is.
Windows PowerShell is an automation engine that ships standard in Windows 10,
standard in Windows Server.
I have to again be careful not to overexplain at this level
because this is the Microsoft Technology Associate or MTA
level and not the MCSE level.
If you are interested in learning more about PowerShell,
hang out until the end of this module because you know that I
like to give references to the Pluralsight courses that
relate to what we're talking about.
Moreover, check the exercise files.
So this is a cool slide because it shows you some sample code,
a function that I actually run every day up on top,
and then down at the bottom, you see a generic PowerShell pipeline.
And PowerShell is basically wrapping a lot of the deep power that
Windows programmers get and presents it in a consistent way for
administrators who may be allergic to programming and makes it
easier for them to do automation tasks.
So for instance, you've probably have seen PowerShell cmdlets,
they have a standard verb, Get, Set, Write,
this sort of thing, dash some kind of prefix,
for instance SharePoint server cmdlets begin with SP.
Azure Resource Manager cmdlets, their noun starts with Azure RM,
so it's an identifier to the family of cmdlet it is
and then the rest of the noun.
And then you customize the behavior of the cmdlet by specifying
what are called parameters and parameter values.
Now see that pipe character at the end there,
the pipe character is one of the secret sauce components of PowerShell
where you can take the output of one part of the pipeline and feed it into
the next segment of the pipeline as an input,
really powerful way to build automation workflows.
And without getting too deep here,
I want you to look at that function and just see if
intuitively you can get a grasp of what it's doing.
A function in PowerShell is the same as a function in any programming language.
It's a unit of code execution that accomplishes a particular task
and the task I wanted to accomplish here was retrieving how long
a particular system has been up, in other words,
turned on without being shut down or restarted.
So I've given the function a standard verb,
Get, and I've used Uptime as my none.
The first thing I do is create a variable,
a couple of them actually,
one that retrieves the operating system that the cmdlet is run on,
which on my system, is Windows 10 Enterprise edition.
The uptime variable retrieves the current date,
and then we wind up fetching into that operating
system object when it was last booted, that's tracked already in Windows.
It's at a low level, but PowerShell is able to retrieve it.
And then finally, on Line 5, we're formatting the output.
We're going to say uptime: a certain number of days,
certain number of hours, certain number of minutes.
And then on Line 6, we write that finished output to the display.
I'll put an overlay graphic so you can see what this
function looks like when it's actually run,
it's very handy, and this is a super simple example,
but I hope it has you thinking wow, there is a lot of things that I do, even as a Windows 10 end user that could benefit from automation.